Title: Waking Up: The Art of Setting An Alarm
Slug: waking-up-how-to-set-an-alarm
Tags: lifehack
Status: draft

For me, waking up is and always has been hard.  That, together with an
intolerance for coffee and a natural late-night tendency, brews up the
perfect storm for a poor start to the day.

During my PhD---especially the last six months, when I desperately
needed every single minute of every day---I tried everything.  I logged
my sleeping habits, setting my alarm for 6am every morning and
watching my sleep duration oscillate and converge to 6 hours 40
minutes.  But even then, I would sometimes simply sleep through
alarms, my brain resisting departure from the world of inception with
all its might.

Eventually, out of desperation, I tried an experiment in conditioning:
practicing the motions of getting up (taking a deep breath, sitting
up, jumping out of bed) several times before going to sleep.  It
sounds pretty wacky, saying it now, but to my surprise it worked well
enough.  Perhaps only because I was watching the outcome of the
experiment so keenly.

Either way, as effective as that was, it was not a particularly
*pleasant* way to wake up, and I started searching for a way to make my
brain really *notice* the early morning alarm[^sleep_tracker].

One glaring problem with alarms is **the snooze button**.  Yes, you
want to turn that darn thing off the moment it starts blaring in your
ears.  And once your brain has learnt how to make it stop, you're not
getting up.  After slapping the snooze button five times, chances are
you will accidentally turn off the alarm: bye-bye work, hello
dreamland.

After sleeping restlessly on this problem for many nights, I finally
came up with a straightforward solution that does the trick:

- Set an alarm for 10 minutes before you want to get up.
- Set a *radio alarm* (such as
  [TuneIn Radio](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=tunein.player&hl=en))
  for 10 minutes after the first.

Why is this such a good solution?  When the first alarm goes off, you
are *allowed to snooze it*.  That's right, make it quiet, go back to
sleep.  Your body is aware that wake up time is near, but you still
get your snooze in.  Then, the radio goes off, but because it is a
radio it is *different* every morning.  This is key: there is no
pattern matching your brain can do to say "hey, that's just the alarm,
ignore it".  By the time it has figured out that there isn't a serious
British person suffering from a disturbing pre-occupation with world
news standing next to you in the room---it's just BBC World
Radio---you are wide awake.

So, if you also struggle to wake up, give this method a try and let me
know whether it works for you!

[^sleep_tracker]: I know some people have good success with cell phone
applications such as Sleep Like Android; YMMV.
